---
title: "[PREPRINT] Teardrop and parabolic lens yield curves for viscous-plastic sea ice models: New constitutive equations and failure angles"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-12-07-FixTD
date: 2022-12-07
venue: 'ESSOAR, submitted to JGR: Oceans'
excerpt: ''
---

Note that this is a resubmission for [DOI:10.1002/essoar.10510575.1
](https://doi.org/10.1002/essoar.10510575.1)

### Abstract:

Most viscous-plastic sea ice models use the elliptical yield curve. This yield curve has the fundamental flaw that it excludes acute angles between deformation features at high resolution. Conceptually, the teardrop and parabolic lens yield curves offer an attractive alternative. These yield curves feature a non-symmetrical shape, a Coulombic behavior for the low-medium compressive stress, and a continuous transition to the ridging-dominant mode. We show that the current formulation of the teardrop and parabolic lens viscous-plastic yield curves with normal flow rules results in negative or zero bulk and shear viscosities and consequently poor numerical convergence and representation of stress states on or within the yield curve. These issues are mainly linked to the assumption that the constitutive equation applicable for the elliptical yield curve also applies to non-symmetrical yield curves and yield curves with tensile strength. We present a new constitutive relation for the teardrop and parabolic lens yield curves that solves the numerical convergence issues naturally. Results from simple uni-axial loading experiments show that we can reduce the residual norm of the numerical solver with a smaller number of total solver iterations, resulting in significant improvements in numerical efficiency and representation of the stress and deformation field.

[Download the paper here](https://doi.org/10.1002/essoar.10510575.2)

How to cite: Damien Ringeisen, Martin Losch, Bruno Tremblay. Teardrop and parabolic lens yield curves for viscous-plastic sea ice models: New constitutive equations and failure angles. ESS Open Archive . December 07, 2022. **DOI: 10.1002/essoar.10510575.2**
