---
title: "[Co-A] A sea ice deformation and rotation rate dataset (2017–2023) from the Environment and Climate Change Canada automated sea ice tracking system (ECCC-ASITS) "
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-02-05_SIDRR
date: 2025-02-05
venue: 'The Cryosphere'
excerpt: ''
---

### Abstract:

Sea ice forms a thin but horizontally extensive boundary between the ocean and the atmosphere and has complex, crust-like dynamics characterized by intermittent sea ice deformations. The heterogeneity and localization of these sea ice deformations are important characteristics of the sea ice cover that can be used to evaluate the performance of dynamical sea ice models against observations across multiple spatial and temporal scales. Here, we present a new pan-Arctic sea ice deformation and rotation rate (SIDRR; https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13936609, Plante et al., 2024a) dataset derived from the RADARSAT Constellation Mission (RCM) and Sentinel-1 (S1) synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery from 1 September 2017 to 31 August 2023. The SIDRR estimates are derived from contour integrals of triangulated ice motion data, obtained from the Environment and Climate Change Canada automated sea ice tracking system (ECCC-ASITS). The SIDRR dataset is not regularized and consists of stacked data from multiple SAR images computed on a range of spatial (4–10 km) and temporal (0.5–6 d) scales. It covers the entire Arctic Ocean and all peripheral seas except the Okhotsk Sea. Uncertainties associated with the propagation of tracking errors on the deformation values are included. We show that rectangular patterns of deformation features are visible when the sampled deformation rates are lower than the propagation error. This limits the meaningful information that can be extracted in areas with low SIDRR values but allows for the study of linear kinematic features with a high SIDRR signal-to-noise ratio. The spatial coverage and range of resolutions of the SIDRR dataset provide an interesting opportunity to investigate regional and seasonal variability in sea ice deformation statistics across scales, and these data can also be used to determine metrics for model evaluation.

[Download the paper here](https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-17-423-2025)

How to cite: 

Plante, M., Lemieux, J.-F., Tremblay, L. B., Bouchat, A., Ringeisen, D., Blain, P., Howell, S., Brady, M., Komarov, A. S., Duval, B., Yakuden, L., and Labelle, F.: A sea ice deformation and rotation rate dataset (2017–2023) from the Environment and Climate Change Canada automated sea ice tracking system (ECCC-ASITS), Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 17, 423–434, https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-17-423-2025, 2025. 
