---
title: "[Co-A] Datasets and protocols for including anomalous freshwater from melting ice sheets in climate simulations"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-11-07_DAFW
date: 2025-11-07
venue: 'Geoscientific Model Development'
excerpt: ''
---

### Abstract:

Anomalous freshwater fluxes from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and ice shelves are impacting the surrounding oceans, and we need to be able to account for these effects in climate model simulations over the historical period and in future projections. In previous phases of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP), models mostly either assumed that the ice sheets were in mass balance, or that discharge from the ice sheets was constant, but in neither case was the observed increasing discharge over the historical period properly represented. In this paper, we present data products of absolute and anomalous freshwater mass fluxes from both major ice sheets, and recommendations for their use in historical simulations. These fluxes can be implemented in climate simulations as a forcing for models that do not (yet) include interactive ice sheets, or used to evaluate models that do. We also make recommendations for how climatological and anomalous fluxes can be implemented in climate models that may have different approaches to interactions with the ice sheets. These forcings are available for CMIP7 simulations and should lead to more robust and coherent simulation of sea surface temperature, sea ice and regional sea level trends in the recent historical period and, as these data are extended, improve the credibility of projections.

### Short Summary

The impact of increasing mass loss from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets has not so far been included in historical climate model simulations. This paper describes the protocols and data available for modeling groups to add this anomalous freshwater to their ocean modules to better represent the impacts of these fluxes on ocean circulation, sea ice, salinity and sea level.

[Download the paper here](https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-18-8333-2025)

How to cite: 

Schmidt, G. A., Mankoff, K. D., Bamber, J. L., Burgard, C., Carroll, D., Chandler, D. M., Coulon, V., Davison, B. J., England, M. H., Holland, P. R., Jourdain, N. C., Li, Q., Marson, J. M., Mathiot, P., McMahon, C. R., Moon, T. A., Mottram, R., Nowicki, S., Olivé Abelló, A., Pauling, A. G., Rackow, T., and Ringeisen, D.: Datasets and protocols for including anomalous freshwater from melting ice sheets in climate simulations, Geosci. Model Dev., 18, 8333–8361, https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-18-8333-2025, 2025. 
